Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Lopes, and today I'm
joined by Doctor Jonathan Bobali. He's a professor of
linguistics at Harvard University. He specializes in morphology, syntax,
and typology, and today we're talking mostly about morphology,
morphosyntax, human universal, universals in language and other related
topics. So, Doctor Bobali, welcome to the show. It's
a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you, thank you for having me.
So, I've already had a few interviews on linguistics
on the show, but actually I've never spoken before
about morphology specifically, at least as far as I
remember. So could you tell us a little bit
to start off with? What morphology is, I mean,
as someone who is interested in morphology in linguistics,
what kinds of questions are you interested in and
what kinds of questions do people who work on
this specific topic try to answer?
Great, yes, that's a great question. It's actually sort
of one of the smaller disciplines within linguistics, so
it's not surprising that you haven't heard much about
it. And so morphology is the study of words.
The, the, the morph means form. It's the, the
form of words and the kinds of questions we
look at, um, we look at, um, uh, correspondences
between form and meaning beyond the arbitrary. So, famously
100 years ago, more than that now, uh, Ferdinand
de Sousa pointed out that the reason the word
dog means dog is sort of arbitrary. It's just
a bunch of sounds, and they mean what they
mean. But beyond that, the word dogs just doesn't
happen to mean a number of dogs. It means
a number of dogs because it's got dog in
it and another piece and that other piece means
plural or indicates plural. Um, SO we like to
look at cross linguistically, uh, at these complex words
that have multiple pieces inside them, and we ask,
you know, what are the, are there any limits,
any possible rules on the combination of those words
or the combination of the pieces to create words.
So you get some neat puzzles like ambiguity. Um,
THE word unlockable is a fun and interesting word
in English because it can, it means almost its
own opposite. On the one hand, it means something
that is able to be unlocked. On the other
hand, it means something that cannot be locked. It
is unlockable, you know, a door that has no,
no, no binding to connect it or etc. And
so we have a theory cross linguistically of what
the what the we try to develop a theory
of how these relationships between form and meaning uh
are constrained in languages, like you said in the
introduction, whether there are any universals to this is
an open question.
And what are these building blocks of words? I
mean, what are the units that we're dealing with
here exactly?
So the easiest way to think about this and
the way we like to think about it the
most, the sort of most constrained view, is what
we call morphemes. It's morphology. We study. Morphemes, phonology
studies, phonemes, etc. Um, SO the, the, the pieces,
the, the un in unlockable, the Able and unlock
unlockable, the zoo in dogs, we call these morphemes.
These are minimal, minimal pairings of, of form and
meaning. And I say form rather than sound, uh,
we've discovered over the last, uh, time, uh, decades
that sign languages have exactly have analogous structures have
very much the same structures as spoken languages. So
you'll see classical definitions that say pairings of sound
and meaning, but it's really pairings of form and
meaning. These languages have exactly the kind of riot
structure that we see. There is, I should say,
right, morphology is based on the study of morphemes,
but it's not always easy to break things down
into pieces. So the past tense of run in
English is ran. It's not like or the path,
the plural of man is men. It's not like
dogs. You don't say mans. So it's less clear
that there's there's little pieces or morphemes in these
things, um, but it's the same general kinds of
ideas.
Uh, SO when it comes to morphemes and basically
how you break down words into smaller components, is
that something that's, that You as a linguist, for
example, just do because it's useful scientifically speaking to
understand, to understanding how language works, or does it
have a correspondent in terms of how we cognitively
process language? I mean, do those smaller components correspond
to something uh cognitively speaking?
But absolutely we believe that this is cognitively instantiated.
This is, this is a key piece of it.
Um, SO the kinds of evidence, uh, that we
take for looking cross linguistically, uh, we analyze individual
languages as static systems. We say, what are the
pieces of it. But we also ask how children
acquire these things, when they acquire these things. A
famous, um, uh, example that you may have come
across elsewhere. Is what's called the WOUG test. Uh,
THIS was, uh, Jean Berko Gleeson in the 1950s,
uh, did a test with children to show, uh,
these were 3 and 4 year old children. You
draw a little figure that they've never seen before,
some imaginary animal. You say, this is a wug.
Uh, AND then you have two of them and
you say, what are these? And kids say, these
are wugs, and they know that this is the
right way of doing it. Interestingly, Um, in English
we have this distinction between and sir. So dogs
and cats, you don't say cat zoo and you
don't say dogs, so you could in principle, there's
nothing about the articulatory system that constrains us, and
we can see this with what's called minimal pairs.
I'm in Boston right now. There's the famous baseball
stadium Fenway Park. This is in a fen. A
fen is a kind of swamp, and when there's
more than one, we say the Fenzoo with because
that's the the plural rule. Um, BUT, uh, we
can say the word fence. There's nothing wrong with
having a se after an N. It's totally reasonable.
You can put an S after an end, but
you don't. And kids know this when they are
3 and 4 years old without ever being taught.
This is the advantage of the log test. So
we know that there must be some developing cognitive
system that manipulates these rules, um, uh, that, uh,
to some extent children have long before they have
uh a conscious introduction or uh instruction about language.
And so, Ultimately, this, this, this test was done
in the 1950s. People are now working on neuroimaging
tests and uh much fancier tests, but we know
it is cognitively instantiated. Exactly how is a much
harder question that goes beyond. I,
I understand that. But let me just ask you
another question about that then. I mean, in that
case, uh, basically children, infants learning without direct instruction.
Are you referring to how they learn the rules
of the language they are being exposed to, or
are we talking about a broader cognitive system that
operates potentially across all languages or across different.
That's a beautiful question. That's a beautiful question. Both.
The answer is both. Um, SO, uh, they're learning
the rules, as you say, in this case, the
rule is a rule of adding the rule has
two components. One is adding S or Z, and
one is choosing between S or Z. The choice
between S or Z is is a phonological rule.
It has to do with the way sounds combine,
and as I said, it's a non-obvious rule. If
you think about it, uh, we can say the
S after an N, but we don't in the
plural. So there's something very special and and uh
English specific about it that children need to learn.
So this is a rule, but it's also a
piece. The S is the S plural is a
piece. It's one of these morphemes. So we are
interested in how children acquire the language that they
are exposed to as you frame it. Um, LONG
before any parents aren't saying, this is how you
say the plural, this is how you say the
plural. And also, children have to figure out why
you don't say mans. They sometimes make errors and
say things like this, or foots, right? Why you
say feet. So they have to learn the pieces,
they have to learn the rules, and all of
these things involve, uh, so the specific pieces and
the specific. Rules are specific to the language that
they're learning. And this is a really interesting area
of study. How do they do this? How do
they do this so quickly? There is a sparsity
of data. There's, there's a limited amount of time
in the day. There's a limited number of words
that kids hear. There's an infinite number of possible
rule systems that they could be acquiring that would
be compatible, that would describe accurately. The language they're
exposed to, but they tend very quickly to hone
in on the same one, and they get there
very fast, and that's neat. That's a very interesting
idea. And that then asks this question you said
earlier about the the broader cognitive system of all
of language. So, It, it seems to be that
they are not just what we used to consider
a blank slate. This was a proposal from a
long time ago, that the, the child's mind is
a blank slate upon which the experience writes. It
seems to be constrained in various ways. There are
patterns there are, first of all, children learn very
quickly and converge on some hypotheses and, and not
others. And secondly, cross linguistically, this comes back to
what we were saying. Cros linguistically, certain patterns occur
in. Many languages and other, uh, patterns don't occur,
uh, in any languages that we know of. And
that suggests it's another type of evidence that suggests
that there's some kind of cognitive limitation on the
hypotheses, if you will, that that learners will, will
pause it when they're analyzing the language data. And
we're trying to capture that. We're trying to figure
that out, kind of reverse engineer the system, but
from the data that we have.
Mhm. So we'll get more into human universals and
language and more specifically morphology later on in our
conversation. There are some other very interesting questions to
explore here. But just before that, uh, I think
that you've already touched a little bit on this
question in your previous answers, but what can we
learn about language by studying morphology then?
We can learn a lot. I hope we can
learn a lot because this is what I do,
right? Um, SO, uh, one thing we can try
to figure out again by looking at what patterns
occur and what patterns don't occur, uh, we can
begin to build an idea, um, of how the
human cognitive system works. Ultimately, that's the goal is
to get to the cognitive system, but it's a,
it's a distant goal. It's on the horizon right
now, we look for it, we're at the level
of looking for these patterns cross linguistically. If I
could, for example, Uh, switch to one of the
universal patterns at the moment. Now, we'll come back.
I know you want to talk about this in
more detail later, but I think this gives you
a good way of of answering this question. Um,
uh, WORK I did a number of years ago,
um, uh, looked at comparatives and superlatives. So you
say good and you say better, and in a
language where you say, so you say big, bigger,
biggest, right? Um, Portuguese, you do these paraphrastically, I
think, right? You say the analog of big, more
big, and the more big. Yes, um, but the,
um, uh, the interesting thing is for the irregular
ones like, uh, good, better, best. You never find
a language that says good, the equivalent of better
with a totally different form, and then goes back
and says goodest. You don't you you don't say
good, better, goodest. Why not? Well, this turns out
to be like sort of an interesting finding across
lots and lots and lots of languages. I believe
it's a universal. I know I have no counter
examples. Uh, AND if that's true, what does that
tell us? OK, we've documented the languages, we've made
a list and we have this neat fact. But
the explanation that seems to be on the table
is one that goes along the lines of saying,
uh what does best mean? There's sort of two
things best could mean. One could mean just exceedingly
good, like very, very, very good. Uh, THIS would
be these Isimo type adjectives that you have in
romance that we lack in, in English, something like
Bellissimo or whatever, um. But another one is the
more specific one, and the more specific one, the
meaning of the superlative is more adjective than all
others, right? So if I say something is the
the tallest mountain, right, it is taller than all
other mountains, and that taller piece is comparative inside
it has this comparative meaning inside it. In English,
taller and tallest don't look like they have the
the morphology inside them, in Portuguese they do, because
you put the definite article in front. But it
looks, the only way to understand why this is
a universal is if all languages really are Portuguese,
but hidden. So English tallest really is the more
tall, the one that is taller than all of
the others. If that's true, we learned this from
morphology from looking at the various pieces in the
words. But what we've discovered is a constraint on
the way we as humans conceptualize, at least for
the language system, the meaning of the superlative relationship.
So you wouldn't get that from a textbook. If
you look at a textbook of English or German
or whatever, it just says, here's the comparative, here's
the superlative. But it turns out this is the
way we conceive of it. Why? There's all different
ways we could have conceived of it. There's all
different ways the world could have been, but it
is this way. And so you ask this as
a long-winded answer, but you asked about the, uh,
what studying morphology tells us, and here it's telling
us something about the cognitive, uh, uh, conception of
in this case, um, uh. The meaning of the
superlative, but all kinds of aspects of, of how,
uh, concepts are encoded in language seem to follow
these kinds of universal generalizations. And that's exciting because
it's non-obvious and it comes from the linguistic system.
I can give you a second example quickly if
you want,
but yes, please go ahead.
OK. So, uh, another neat example that comes from
morphology, this one's a little bit complicated, but again,
it's a meaning one. Um, uh, IF you think
about, um, words like open or closed, they can
be adjectives or they can be verbs. And so
if we say, uh, so, you know, I'm in
New England and New England has snowy weather in
the winter, so imagine we think about a mountain
pass, and you say that the mountain pass, let's
imagine there's a, let's imagine there's a shoulder of
a mountain, it has no dip inside it, um.
And what happens at some point is there's a
rockfall or an avalanche and a, and a dip
appears. This dip has never been there before, and
now we have a pass. We say a pass
has opened up, right? Then there's another rock fall
and it fills it in. We can say, oh,
the pass is closed again. Right? Well, that's interesting
again here is really interesting because it has never
been closed before. Nobody had closed it before. It
opened once and then went closed again. So what
this again. IS doing is it's saying it's returning
to the state of being closed. The verb, the
action, close the past, has never happened before. But
it's a return, we call it a restituive reading.
It is returned to the state. You can think
of all kinds of examples. A student at McGill
wrote a dissertation looking at this. You can think
of, um, an underwater cave that's full of water.
And then the water level goes down and it
and it dries out, and then Global warming, the
water level rises again, and the the cave is
filled in again, right? We can use this again,
even though it's false to say you that we
filled in, like the action of filling in has
happened for a second time. It only happened once,
but it returns it to its previous state. So
you might think, so there's an analysis out there
that says, OK, this is because the semantics of
the word again, what again means is ambiguous in
English. It can mean either of these two things.
But it turns out it means the same ambiguity,
the same two things in language after language after
language. Um, uh, A student at University of Connecticut
wrote a dissertation showing this for Chinese, for Mandarin
that shows exactly the same ambiguity. So why is
this morphology? Well, in a number of languages, the
way you say to open or to close has
an extra morpheme. It's like in English we say
the screen is wide, actually, let's say the screen
is narrow. I want to widen it. There's a
wide piece and a morpheme in. And so they
again can refer just to the adjective or to
the adjective plus the verbal morpheme, the complex verb.
That ambiguity is a morphological ambiguity. It's hidden in
English because when we say open, it looks like
it's the same word, but it really isn't. There's
really two pieces in. And we can pick them
up semantically, and we can do this in language
after language after language. So again, we've learned something
about the way language is encode our perception of
events in the world. So we encode a notion
like opening. As having two pieces. There's a causal
piece, and there's a state piece, and the linguistic
system can pick out those pieces individually. It's a
bit of a complex example. But these are the
kinds of things that we study, um, over and
over and over. Again, as you framed it, there's
a fun day to day part, which is finding
the pieces. And segmenting it into, but that's just
the starting part. At the end behind it, we're
asking these deeper questions about why do we find
the same, uh, patterns in language after language? And
what does that tell us about human cognition, both
the system of language and the system of encoding
meaning in language. Mhm.
And what is more for syntax?
Yeah, cool. Good question. Um, SO, uh, morphosyntax has
two pieces in it, right? It has morpho and
it has syntax. It's a complex word. It's morphemes.
And so morpho is, is the morphology part, and
syntax is how words combined together to make phrases.
And so one of the things we ask as
morphologists, we pay an eye to, so when I
looked at dog and dogs, I was looking primarily,
the example I gave you was about the silent,
the so the alternation. But there's also a study
of of how individual words relate to syntax, to
the study of phrases and the study of sentences.
So, uh, just to take an example, your dog
dogs example, um, that's a plural word and so
it would occur in a plural syntactic environment, you
would say one dog, two dogs. Interesting on this,
one of the things you could look at in
morphosyntax, um. Some languages like English, Portuguese, and others
have a number distinction. We have singular and plural.
There's other languages with other number distinctions, that's also
very interesting. Um, AND we use the plural when
we say when we count, we say two dogs,
and we use the plural when we talk about,
uh, a plural group. We say, oh, dogs are
in the garden or something of this sort. Um,
THERE are languages that have no number distinction that
never mark this, um, and there are interestingly languages
that mark plural dog dogs, when you say I
like dogs, or I saw dogs yesterday, but not
when you put a number there. You say two
dogs, Turkish is of this sort. You say, uh,
they have a plural, there's a clear plural marker,
but when you use it with a number. Evidently
the number conveys enough information. The plural in English
is somehow redundant in that fact. 2, you already
said 2, but we have to say dogs, you
can't say two dogs. So morphosyntax studies, um, so
where morphology proper studies the internal form of words
and maybe their connection to sound and meaning, morphosyntax
studies the the syntactic contexts in which words do
and don't occur. And again, we ask the same
kinds of questions about universals and recurring patterns and
how children acquire those patterns and what they tell
us about the cognitive apparatus.
But what is then the relationship or how should
we look at the relationship between morphology and syntax?
Is it that one drives the other, or is
it that both influence each other in different ways?
Yeah, uh, this is something if you get a
bunch of morphologists together at a conference, we will
fight. Um, SO, um, um. So let's go back,
so, so to unlockable or even just take lockable,
right? Or or or teacher and teachable and teach
and stuff. Teaches a verb, so it goes in
a particular place in the in the syntax in
a language like English has particular set of properties.
Uh, A teacher is a noun, so I can't
teach you and I can't teach you. It's a
teachable as an adjective, so it's gonna have a
different syntax. And it seems reasonable from this kind
of example to say, to take the phrase you
use that morphology drives syntax, that you build the
words, you, you have the word teach, it's a
verb, and so it has a particular syntax. Um,
OR you make the word teacher, it's a noun,
and so it had because you have added this
suffix er, it has a particular a different syntax,
a nominal syntax, you say the teacher is whatever
tall, short, boring, interesting something. Um, AND so this
makes you think, OK, that the the morphology is
prior. First you put the pieces together and then
what you've done in the morphology drives or determines
your syntax. But there's other examples that work differently,
that seem to suggest the other direction, and this
is why this is a live question. Um, LET'S
see if I can give you an example in
quick form. So, um, I, I, in English we
have in inflectional morphology we're relatively poor. In some
languages, when you take the verb, the verb shows
what the person and number of the subject are.
In English, you get that a bit with B
I M U R, uh she is, etc. BUT
with regular verbs in the present tense, we only
have a two-way distinction. He, she, it works and
everything else is work. I work, you work, they
work, etc. There's no ending on these things. And
it actually turns out to be hard to, you
could sort of say that works is driving the
syntax. Works is third person singular. It takes a
third person singular subject because it has the S
on it. But the other one doesn't have any
information on it. So you could say, OK, it
just doesn't contribute any information, and that's why you
have a pronoun. I work, you work, they work
but uh Turkish to dog. You don't need to
have an ending on it cause the ending is
redundant. But if that's the case, you should be
able to say he work, she work, or it
work. These would be fine. They're equally informative as
I work, they work, you work, etc. There's no
reason that should be the case. So here you
want to say that the syntax is driving the
morphology, that you've chosen your subject first. You say,
I want to talk about myself, I say I,
and then I choose the, the best fitting form
of the verb for that context. And English has
a poor range of choices. Portuguese has more. Into
has more, lots of languages have more. English is
very poor. I've got two choices, S or nothing.
And S is the best choice for a third
person singular. And if I'm not 3 person singular,
I don't choose S. So that there, the information
seems to work the other way. First you determine
the syntactic context, and then you choose the form
that best fits that context. And so, um. We
have evidence here that's pulling us in two different
directions as to whether morphology drives syntax, and a
lot of the work that's done today is to
ask, can we go back to the evidence that
looks like it goes one way and rethink it,
reanalyze it so that it, everything really goes in
one direction, a simpler theory maybe. Um, I think
that's true. I think we can get a lot
of work done by saying that that morphology never
drives syntax, that it always works the way it
works, works, that it's always the way that you
have that you determine the syntax first, somewhat abstractly,
and then you determine the morphological form relative to
that syntax. Um, BUT it's a harder, more abstract
argument to make.
But in this particular case, really understanding and coming
to a conclusion when it comes to this debate
as to whether morphology drives syntax or the other
way around. Would this have broader implications as to
how we understand the cognition behind language? I mean,
would this basically have ramifications to other aspects of
how we process language or is it restrict To,
to the question itself regarding morphology and
so it would, but every, every time we go
up a level, and I'm sure this is true
with other people you talk to in other fields,
every time you go up a level of abstraction,
the, the, the questions become more abstract and it's
harder to make a compelling argument one way or
another. But the, the works case, the works versus
work case, this is an example of we describe
it, it's described in many, many terms by different
people, but it's competition. You think about language as,
as, um, uh, I said choosing the best form,
here's our superlative again, choosing the best form for
the particular syntactic context. And there's a view out
there that this is a fundamental property of language
that all of it involves some level some notion
of competition. This is clear in what's called pragmatics,
it's clear in other kinds of realms. Um, LET
me come back to another example. Um, I, uh,
one of the things with number cross linguistically, as
I said, English has singular and plural. Some languages
also have a dual, which marks exactly 2. So
there would be three forms of the word dog.
Innuut works this way. Um, um, uh, WE talk
about the Inuit language, the Inuit people, the Inuit
is the plural, Inuk is the singular, and then
there's another form, Inuk, which is when there's exactly
2. Um, AND, uh, when we ask about these
languages, these are the all the major possibilities in
the world's languages. Either you have a singular plural
distinction or you have singular plural and dual. The
interesting thing is that in some cases the dual
is restricted. You only have the dual at certain
times. The plural, when the plural is contrasted with
a dual, means 3 or more. If I have
a dual form available and I use the plural
form, Inuit, I mean, for example, 3 or more
and not 2. So the plural there seems to
mean something different than it does in English or
Portuguese. But if I have a dual, if I
don't have the dual form available, then the plural
just means more than one, that's sort of normal
meaning of plural. So again, we think about this
as a term uh as a a sense of
competition. I've gone back into morphology, but we think
about this in terms of competition. You look at
the best form, the most informative form that's available
for the particular environment that you're looking at. And
so it has to be a competition among competing
forms. There's a theory that this is how language
works brought not just morphology, but generally when we
say a sentence, we, we use the where there's
um competing kinds of uh constraints. I'm trying to
be lazy as a speaker and say the shortest
thing, but I'm also trying to be as informative
as possible to you, and I'm balancing these domains.
And so this kind of competition might deeply characterize
all of language, the cognitive system that involves language.
And so we, when we look at morphology, we're
looking at a piece of this system and asking,
do the, in particular on the technical aspect, do
the kinds of ways we need to, the kinds
of assumptions we need to make about characterizing the
cognitive system to understand the morphology, match up. With
the kinds of ways people deal with competition in
pragmatics or in syntax and semantics, etc. And this
is an exciting area. I mean, I wish I
could tell you, yes, the answer is yes, and
we know this. Um, BUT, you know, then I
could just hang up my hat and say, we've
finished the, the field. There's a lot of open
questions. I think there's all exciting reasons to think
this is true. Um, BUT not everybody sees it
that way. And so there's work still to be
done.
No, this is the, I guess, the beauty of
science. It's an ongoing enterprise and it's also fascinating
to notice over time how knowledge changes and evolves.
So, but let's get then into human universal specifically
in language. So, what do you make of universal
grammar and the Work by Noam Chomsky earlier, you
suggested that you're not very much into, uh, blank
slightest approaches to, I guess, human cognition more broadly,
but to language more specifically. But specifically about Noam
Chomsky's work, because if I understand it correctly, even
Uh, what universal grammar entails, uh, for he himself,
it has changed over time
slightly, right? So, so. There's a lot of, uh,
a lot of discussion of this, uh, peripheral discussion,
and I think there's a lot of, of, uh,
uh, confusion about the terminology or, or different people
that are talking it somewhat cross purposes because they're
using the terminology in different ways. Um, THE, the,
the, the initial proposal and I think the part
that has, has remained unchanged in this, and I
think that the part of it, it. It should
almost be uncontroversial, is this sort of polar opposition
between the blank slate and not the blank slate.
So, uh, put a pin in the notion of
universal grammar just for a moment. What we say
is, um, why is it that children, uh, uh,
learn languages quickly, they learn a lot of properties
without, uh, explicit instruction, and they converge on the
same answers or the same structures or the same
patterns in language after language after language, sometimes universal
to the extent that we know. Um, AND Chomsky's
answer was, if they are just reacting to the
environment, this was the behaviorist idea as a blank
slate, this would be a surprising fact, a surprising
outcome. Um, AND he suggested that there are, um,
universal cognitive constraints, inherent biases that shape the way
children are going to interact with the data in
the world around them. We know such biases exist
independently. I'm sure you've talked to people in other
fields. Um, THE easy one to appreciate is that
newborn babies. Fixate on two circles and a line.
If you put that pattern on the wall the
day they're born, they look at that. So they're
they're somehow preprogrammed to look for faces. It's probably
not the case that they, you know, they are
looking for faces, but there's some inherent hardwired bias,
uh, that affects their visual and attention system that
chooses the way the massive amount of data that's
coming towards them is filtered. And Chomsky's proposal was
that there are such filters for language, and this
is universal grammar. Universal grammar is not that we
all share the same rule for making plurals that
we all share um the the like you pick
up a grammar book and it says, you know,
you write the subject before the verb, none of
that is universal. The universal grammar refers to these
filters or these biases. Um, AND that's at that
level that, that seems to be right, that just
seems to be right. The debates now, and this
is where, um, where you might say that Chomsky's
thinking about this over time has changed, is what
is the content of those biases, what are the
form. And that there's two ways of thinking about
this, and you may have heard these terms before.
One is it, um, is it domain specific or
domain general? So are our biases specific to language?
Are the pieces that are hardwired, the constraints that
make us approach the data in a particular way,
are those specific to language, or are they general
cognitive properties? So I gave you an argument. My
view would say. Universal grammar, our inherent cognitive capacities,
tells us that the only way to make a
true superlative is one that contains the comparative. You
can only build the meaning more x than all
others if you can build the meaning more X.
So if our, our brains manipulate or our minds
manipulate symbolic representations, this is a constraint on possible
symbolic representations. That's cool, right? Um, AND so I
would see that as a part of universal grammar,
we're constrained to approach the data that way, and
that's consistent with sort of Chomsky's view. But what
I don't know is whether the source of that
constraint is about linguistic symbolic representations, or about symbolic
representations in the brain generally, including non-linguistic representations. And
that's a hard, hard, hard thing to do, to
try to figure out, right? Um, THE counting universal
as well, right? So I said there are 3
possibilities. Languages have no marking of number. You have
marking of singular plural distinctions on nouns like in
English after a number, or just in general when
you're talking about plurals, or you do it when
you're just talking about plurals, but Turkish like, not
after the noun. It's not just about redundancy. If
it was just about redundancy, English would be just
like Turkish, 2 dog would be totally fine. Um,
AND so we ask about the nature of the
symbolic system. Um, AND so you, you then you
want to ask, how fine-grained is universal grammar in
this system? How fine-grained are the predetermined constraints on
the cognitive system that yield these patterns as the
output? What are the contributions that come from outside
of language, general psychology, general cognition, and what are
the constraints that come from a language system? And
certainly over time, uh, Chomsky's view and other people's
view on both the, the content, what is language
specific and what is more domain general, and what
is the form of the specific restrictions has changed.
Early work had a lot richer universal grammar in
terms of its content of the actual specific formulation.
And the thinking has changed that that it's actually,
it may have less that is specific to language,
but that comes from general systems and has specific
instantiations in language. Um, AND I, you know, this
is what I spent my day looking at and,
and, uh, I, I don't see evidence against at
the broad level, the view that there are hardwired
constraints that surface in the way children learn and
in the way we see these patterns cross linguistically
as universals. I'm happy to fight with people about
the narrow details, but at the broad level that
that seems to be right. OK,
but at this point then, if I were to
ask you, what do you know, what do we
know about human universals in language? What can we
say about that? I mean, what are the universals
that we can point
to? Yeah, so there's actually, uh, there's quite a
few, and there's um I uh I. There's quite
a few, a few, quite a few at the
level of description. I can give you a whole
bunch. Most of them are, and so this is
actually another interesting point, um, of terminology. There's, there's
many different kinds of universals and people use this
in different, uh different uh ways. Um, MOST in
morphology, most people using the term universal mean it
in what we call an implicational universal. It does
not mean that all languages have. Some particular property,
but rather statements of the form. If a language
has this property, then it has that property. So
for example, if a language has a dual number
form, a form that marks two elements like dog
dogs, we don't in English, we only have singular
plural. If a language marks a distinction between dual
and non-dual, it also marks a distinction between plural
and non-plural, 3 and above, and that's that was
first observed. 50, 60, 70 years ago, and of
course, you know, scientists are an ordinary bunch. Anytime
someone proposes a universal, a whole bunch of young
energetic people try to show that it's wrong, and
they point to various examples and we look at
them more closely, and it isn't wrong. It's right,
it's true, right? So there's um Uh, there is
somebody, uh, Hans Planck in Germany who keeps, uh,
uh, an archive of, of proposed universals with notes
on their various kinds of, um, counter alleged counterexamples,
etc. There are a lot in morphology, there are
a lot of these kinds of universals, implicational universals.
There are things we know, um. There are a
lot more proposed universals, some of which are proposed
over smaller samples, and we don't know yet whether
they're right, but there are a lot of universals
of this sort, um, and I could, you know,
I could give you lists. I've alluded to a
few others already with like the, the no good
better goodness type universal um prenominal systems, systems of
I, me, you, he, she, it, then. There are
really at a fundamental level in terms of person
marking, first person, second person, etc. There are really
fundamentally only two systems that languages have. There are
only 2, and everything else is a variation on
one of those two systems. And the two systems
are the English style or Portuguese or European style
system, where you have 1 person, 2nd person, and
third person. I am, you are, she is, right?
And then there are languages that have that, plus,
in addition, for the first person plural, we, they
make a distinction that we call an inclusive versus
an exclusive we. So when I say we find
this interesting, I'm actually ambiguous about whether I'm including
you, right? I could mean me and the other
linguists, or I could mean you and me because
we're talking about it. There are languages where you
have to specify, where you have to actually just
make that distinction. But again, if our, if our
persons are first person, me, second person, you, and
third person, the inclusive is built by combining the
first and the second person semantically. It's, it takes
the same pieces and it combines them. There are
sociologists, um. Irving Goffman was one such uh sociologist
who worked on personal interaction. And so we talk
in linguistics and I say you, right? I mean
you, oh, what's the, what's the second person? And
we can describe it as the addressee, the one
I'm talking to, or the hearer or the interlocutor
in the various ways. He notes that there's a
lot of different usages of language where these concepts
break apart. So in theater we can talk about
a stage whisper. I look at some other actor
on stage, but I say something which is clearly
for the benefit of the audience or vice versa,
think of all these kinds of things, but languages
never make these distinctions, you know, special forms for
any of this. So again, we have universals of
language. They're telling us something about the cognitive system,
and there's lots and lots and lots of these,
but we still don't quite know to what extent
is the the understanding of these universals arises, uh,
independent of language and is reflected in language. So,
you know, in the universal of person, there's a
bunch of interesting ones about how first person works.
Um, THIS may be because of what we call
a theory of mind. Some children learn early on
in their experience. They don't have a birth, but
they get later, is a sense of self. They
recognize that they exist and are distinct from the
rest of the world. I recognize I exist, the
ego of the self, or whatever, right? And language
then reflects that and prioritizes expression of the first
person, right, in interesting ways morphologically. So, so these
universals are out there, but if you're looking for
universals of the form, all languages do this, no
languages do that. Those are rarer and fewer and
farther between. But, but like for first person, second
person, third person, all languages have some way in
which first person and second person play a role
in their systems. And so, so. This has to
come from somewhere. This is, these are robust, well
understood universals. Um, THERE is a lot of dissent,
but much of the dissent. Some of the dissent
says, OK, we see variation in language, uh, it's
a dissent about some technical details, some technical aspect
about a particular formulation of a universal, or about
whether the universal is reflecting something that is domain
specific to language as opposed to domain general. Those
are harder questions to resolve.
Mhm. And when it comes to morphology, specifically, which
is the main theme of our conversation today, how
do you compare it across languages, which sometimes, uh,
seem very different from one another?
Yep, uh, so on the day to day level,
it's kind of hard. Um, BUT, uh, but with
some of the stuff we've talked about today, uh,
involves comparison. So there's, there's various ways you can,
uh, compare, um, you can think about this in
terms of pinning down the form and comparing, or
you can think about this in terms of pinning
down the meaning, and then comparing the different ways
in which that meaning. Expressed. So plurality, this is,
this you can compare across languages that, you know,
we, we have a general universal sense of the
number of objects. You have one object, you have
more than one object, and then you can ask
how do you, how do you express that in
your language, and you can go and you can
get a pretty good sense. People writing descriptive grammars,
people go out and work with their community or
from their own community. I hope there's more of
that, that people from endangered languages and minority dialects
will begin to describe their own languages and publish
this. And when they do this, then we have
these resources and we can go and we can
look at that. And people use the same often
similar frameworks for describing a language, partly because a
lot of the cognitive concepts are very similar. So
like number, you'll find a chapter on number in
any language that has a uh grammar of a
language that has a number representation, or you could
go out in the field and do the experiments
yourself by putting like one or two objects in
front of it. Um, AND then writing down the
words and or recording the words and and listening
to them and segmenting them. So some stuff can
be done fairly easily, uh, cross linguistically, um, the,
the differences we see tend to be differences in
form more than differences in the fundamental concepts. And
so when you pin the concept down, you can
then just begin to compare the forms cross linguistically.
Um, YOU, uh, going the other way with with
form. Um, uh, THERE are interesting questions you can
ask about, uh, prefixes and suffixes, so you can,
you can gender identify a content word, a verb
or a noun, and then you can look at
the pieces that are attached to it and say,
are they attached on the left or on the
right. I gave the example unlockable at the beginning
of our discussion that has a prefix and a
suffix piece that comes in front, and the piece
that comes at the back. There's a lot of
interesting facts about languages tend to be more suffixing
than they are prefixing. All languages regardless of their
basic word order. This not all languages. Overall, the
vast majority of morphology is suffixing rather than prefixing,
regardless of the word order of the language, whether
verbs come before objects or objects come before. THAT'S
an interesting fact. But then you could say I
could do a form-based comparison. I could look at
all of the prefixes in a variety of languages
and ask, do I have universal patterns in the
meanings they do and don't represent negation always prefixel,
is negation always suffixel, etc. So you can, you
can, despite the surface variation, when you break it
down into a more abstract symbolic representation and talk
about the root word and the prefix and the
suffix and the order of the suffixes, you can
ask, uh, and then characterize these not in terms
of, you know, whether it's a ze or a
or or a ah, but in terms of what
it represents in terms of meaning or function, you
can get a system that's that's much more directly
comparable.
Mhm. So I have one final question then, and
again, regarding how we think about human universals in
language, at least to a certain extent. So, Uh,
I, I want to ask you this because I've
already actually posed more or less the same question
to several other linguists, and I'm curious about your
take on it. So, let's say that uh universal
grammar or some form of universal grammar is correct.
And there are aspects of our cognition that is
associated with language that we share as humans across
all cultures, all societies. If that is correct, uh,
then, uh, I mean, should we expect it to
be. Uh, DOMAIN specific, that is the cognition associated
with language is specialized for the processing of language
or for it to be domain general and language
being something that simply, if you want to take
an evolutionary approach on this, of course, simply piggyback
on uh parts of our cognitive system that evolved
for other purposes, primarily.
So, so, um Let me react to the way
you phrased this one particular word you asked about,
should we expect it to be one way or
another. And I guess the question is in light
of what would we have expectations. Um, MY own,
maybe this is my own personal history of this,
but the, the, um, uh, a priori with no,
with no other um uh assumptions, no other beliefs,
and no other study about it. I would expect
that everything is domain general. I would say, you
know, why, why would there be a domain specific
part of, of ultimately the brain somehow encoded in
the brain that makes us filter the world in
a particular way. But the same thing I think
would be true of vision. Why would babies fixate
on a face on uh two dots in a
line? Once we discover that that's true, it is
true. Right? There must be so there is some
domain specific fixation module that tells you to look
for faces, right? And then you can sort of
ask in evolutionary terms why that exists and people
give stories about it, and I think it has
to do with, you know, making sure you don't
get left alone in the jungle and this kind
of stuff. Um, THE, um, uh, so you could
ask them about language, right? We could, we could
recast this, uh, a priori, just coming to the
topic from the beginning, why would it be the
case that there would be any domain specific, um,
uh, universals, but there appeared to be domain specific
universals. So again, for the, for the notion of
person. There are culturally relevant distinctions that are never
made monomorphemically, where there's just a single morpheme that
makes that meaning. Um, THE inventory of meanings that
we make in person, author of the speech act,
addressee of the Speech Act, and other, right? Uh,
AND then the inclusive that combines the two, and
that's it. Those are the only possibilities. Um, THAT
seems to be domain specific in the sense that
culturally and consciously, we can certainly make and manipulate
and use other distinctions. So it's not coming. In
any obvious way from culture, that these are the
uh the the the categories that language is gonna
have, but these are the categories that language has.
So then we can ask, you know, we rephrase
your question rather than saying what would I expect
out of the blue to be the state of
affairs, more interesting question is, how representative is that
example compared to all of the other examples. Look
at the other examples and ask about them, uh,
how How much are they telling us something domain
specific or domain general? And that's hard and requires
collaboration of people. I'm going this evening to a
panel on collaboration among psychologists, computationalists, and linguists, right?
How do we get to this stuff? I can't
know all of the pieces outside of language. How
do we, how do we get to figure out
these questions? Even there, when we say it's domain
general, and this goes back to the question about
the evolution of the thinking of the representation of
universal grammar. It is, it is fundamentally clear that
languages person systems are built on these categories and
that that this is not specifically domain general, that
it's these categories, but what is domain specific? Is
it these categories with this interpretation that we are
forced to do, or Is it something that says,
given the way psychology works and theory of mind
works, etc. THERE is a domain specific categorization function
that constrains the way linguistic categories are built out
of the primitives that are fed to it from
a domain external system. I had no idea, um,
but I think it's a really, really fundamentally interesting
question. Um, uh, BUT it's a slightly different question
than the one about expectations. It's about, given the
evidence that we have, what do we make of
this evidence, and what is it telling us about
how the, uh, how the ultimately how the cognitive
system works.
Great. So, Doctor Bobali, just before we go, would
you like to tell people where they can find
you and your work on the internet?
Oh, cool. OK, sure. So, so uh my last
name, which I guess you'll see somewhere in a
link or something, B O B A L J
I K Silent J uh dot com is a
is a a link that points to my Harvard
web page and you can find my work there,
um. Uh, I, yeah, uh, you'll find links to
my work there, um, uh, a lot of the
work that you'll find there is more specific, um,
than these kinds of questions. Uh, I think there
are other authors who actually write, uh, very engagingly
about these kinds of questions that I would suggest,
uh, you know, could plug a couple of people.
David Adger just wrote a book that came out
last year. I don't know if you've interviewed him,
uh, I think it's called Language Unlimited, um. Uh,
THAT'S a more, more of a discussion for people
who are interested, not in the technical details of
linguistics. Uh, IT'S a great discussion of some new,
um, uh, higher level questions accessible. Uh, BUT sure,
if people want uh my work and I'm happy
to hear feedback, um, uh, my website, the Harvard
website's good.
Right, so I'm leaving the link in the description
box of the interview and Doctor Bobalik, thank you
so much again for taking the time to come
on the show. It's been a real pleasure to
talk to you.
Thank you, thank you very much for having me.
This has been a lot of fun.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Matri Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Nes called Holbrookfield governor
Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnunseroro and Hal
Herzognun Macha Joan Labra Jasent and the Samuel Corriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran David
Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londono Correa.
Yannick Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynalebaa medicine,
Gary Galman Samov Zallidrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Broner Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti Gabrielon
Scorteus Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the
Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old
Heringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren,
Jeff McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert,
Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner,
Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike
Levin, and Jos Net. A special thanks to my
producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom
Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and
Nick Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Levender,
Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for
all.